2020 New year blogpost (#4062)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2021/01/2021-01-12-new-year-report.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "2020 A Year Like No Other"
tags:
- community
- new-year-blogpost
- governance
authors:
- markyjackson-taulia

> - oleg_nenashev

Author: Anyone else? CC @MarkEWaite

Reviewer: That list seems reasonable to me.  The others were reviewers more than authors.

=== Jenkins in Hacktoberfest 2020

In October we participated in Hacktoberfest.
Our featured projects included the Jenkins core, jenkins.io website and plugins.jenkins.io, Helm charts, and multiple plugins.
We also encouraged contributors to participate in the Documentation as Code and terminology cleanup across the entire Jenkins ecosystem. https://www.jenkins.io/events/hacktoberfest/[https://www.jenkins.io/events/hacktoberfest/] 

In total we received 226 pull requests from Hacktoberfest participants.
Some stats per Jenkins GitHub organization:

* 'jenkinsci', PRs: 189, Hacktoberfest contributors: 61
* 'jenkins-infra', PRs: 100, Hacktoberfest contributors: 40
* 'jenkins-zh', PRs: 37, Hacktoberfest contributors: 2

=== Jenkins at DevOps World

The annual https://www.cloudbees.com/devops-world[DevOps World],
formerly known as DevOps World | Jenkins World held on Sept 22-24, with workshops on Sept 25.
Just like other events in 2020, DevOps World pivoted to a virtual event but that didn’t mean there was a shortage of sessions or networking opportunities. There were over 50 Jenkins/open-source.

> And a special congratulations is in order to this year’s https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/12/11/devops-world-2020-jenkins-contributors-awarded-top-honors-at-devops-worlds-2020/[Jenkins Contributor Award ]winners:

Reviewer: Shorten the link
```suggestion
And a special congratulations is in order to this year’s link:/blog/2020/12/11/devops-world-2020-jenkins-contributors-awarded-top-honors-at-devops-worlds-2020/[Jenkins Contributor Award] winners:
```

* James Holderness - Jenkins security MVP
* Marky Jackson - Most valuable Jenkins advocate
* Tim Jacomb - Most valuable Jenkins contributor

Below are just a few sessions, the full agenda can be found https://sessions.devopsworld.com/sessions[HERE]:

* https://www.cloudbees.com/resources/jenkins-future-pipeline-features[Jenkins Where It Is and Where It Is Going]
* https://www.cloudbees.com/resources/jenkins-master-pdi-software[One Jenkins to Rule them All]
* https://www.cloudbees.com/resources/jenkins-ui-makeover[Jenkins UI Gets a Makeover]
* https://www.cloudbees.com/resources/devsecops-jenkins-pipeline-api-security[Jenkins Pipeline and DevSecOps for API Security]

== Graduation at Continuous Delivery Foundation

Jenkins is the first project to graduate in the CD Foundation.
In August the project announced that the Jenkins project has achieved the graduated status in the https://cd.foundation/[Continuous Delivery Foundation (CDF)].
Thanks to all contributors who made our graduation possible!
Below you can find a few key changes we have applied during the graduation process:

> * We introduced a new https://www.jenkins.io/project/roadmap/[public roadmap] for the Jenkins project.

Reviewer: Shorten links
```suggestion
* We introduced a new link:/project/roadmap/[public roadmap] for the Jenkins project.
```

This roadmap aggregates key initiatives in all community areas: features, infrastructure, documentation, community, etc.
It makes the project more transparent to all Jenkins users and adopters, and at the same time helps potential contributors find the hot areas and opportunities for contribution.
The roadmap is driven by the Jenkins community and it has a fully public process documented in https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/blob/master/jep/14/README.adoc[JEP-14].

> * A new https://www.jenkins.io/project/adopters[list of Jenkins adopters] was introduced on jenkins.io.

Reviewer: Shorten a link
```suggestion
* A new link:/project/adopters[list of Jenkins adopters] was introduced on jenkins.io.
```

This list highlights Jenkins users and references their case studies and success stories,

> including ones submitted through the https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/04/30/jenkins-is-the-way/[Jenkins Is The Way] portal.

Reviewer: Shorten a link

```suggestion
including ones submitted through the link:/blog/2020/04/30/jenkins-is-the-way/[Jenkins Is The Way] portal.
```

Please do not hesitate to add your company there!
* We passed the https://www.coreinfrastructure.org/[Core Infrastructure Initiative (CII)] certification.
This certification helps us to verify compliance with open source best practices and to make adjustments in the project (see the bullets below).
It also provides Jenkins users and adopters with a public summary about compliance with each best practice.
Details are on the https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/en/projects/3538[Jenkins core page].

> * https://www.jenkins.io/project/conduct/[Jenkins Code of Conduct was updated] to the new version of Contributor Covenant.

Reviewer: Shorten link
```suggestion
* link:/conduct/[Jenkins Code of Conduct was updated] to the new version of Contributor Covenant.
```

In particular, it sets best practices of behavior in the community, and expands definitions of unacceptable behavior.

> More information can be found https://cd.foundation/announcement/2020/08/04/cd-foundation-announces-jenkins-graduation/[HERE], and https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/08/04/cdf-graduation/[HERE].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More information can be found https://cd.foundation/announcement/2020/08/04/cd-foundation-announces-jenkins-graduation/[HERE], and link:/blog/2020/08/04/cdf-graduation/[HERE].
```

== Public Roadmap

> The Jenkins project now has a public, community-driven https://www.jenkins.io/project/roadmap/[project roadmap].  Roadmap items are major initiatives and are considered as official plans. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jenkins project now has a public, community-driven link:/project/roadmap/[project roadmap].  Roadmap items are major initiatives and are considered as official plans. 
```

The roadmap aggregates key initiatives in all areas of the project.

Many of the 2020 released roadmap items are mentioned elsewhere in this document, including release automation, https://www.coreinfrastructure.org/[Core Infrastructure Initiative (CII)] certification,

> user interface improvements, https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/05/25/read-only-jenkins-announcement/[read-only configuration pages],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user interface improvements, link:/blog/2020/05/25/read-only-jenkins-announcement/[read-only configuration pages],
```

and Google Summer of Code projects like the GitHub Checks API or External Fingerprint Storage.  

> Other roadmap items include mirror infrastructure improvements, a new https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/08/12/windows-installers-upgrade/[Windows installer],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other roadmap items include mirror infrastructure improvements, a new link:/blog/2020/08/12/windows-installers-upgrade/[Windows installer],
```

and preview releases of pluggable storage for external fingerprints, build logs, and unit test results.

== Jenkins 2020 Elections

In October-December the Jenkins community held the regular elections.
This year we were  electing for 2 governance board members and for all five officer positions, namely: Security, Events, Release, Infrastructure, and Documentation. These roles are an essential part of Jenkins' community governance and well-being. We thank all candidates and voters who participated this year.

Key results:

> * https://github.com/halkeye[Gavin Mogan] and https://github.com/markyjackson-taulia[Marky Jackson] joined the https://www.jenkins.io/project/governance/#governance-board[Jenkins Governance Board]
> * https://github.com/timja[Tim Jacomb] was elected as https://www.jenkins.io/project/team-leads/#release[Release Officer]
> * https://github.com/markyjackson-taulia[Marky Jackson] became the new https://www.jenkins.io/project/team-leads/#events[Events Officer]
> * Olivier Vernin, Daniel Beck, and Mark Waite will continue as Infrastructure, Security and Documentation officers
> 
> Full election results: https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/12/03/election-results/[https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/12/03/election-results/] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://github.com/halkeye[Gavin Mogan] and https://github.com/markyjackson-taulia[Marky Jackson] joined the link:/project/governance/#governance-board[Jenkins Governance Board]
* https://github.com/timja[Tim Jacomb] was elected as link:/project/team-leads/#release[Release Officer]
* https://github.com/markyjackson-taulia[Marky Jackson] became the new link:/project/team-leads/#events[Events Officer]
* Olivier Vernin, Daniel Beck, and Mark Waite will continue as Infrastructure, Security and Documentation officers

Full election results: link:/blog/2020/12/03/election-results/[https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/12/03/election-results/] 
```

=== And even more

This blog post does not provide a full overview of what changed in the project,
it is just a slice of the key highlights mentioned by the contributors.
The Jenkins project consists of more than 2000 plugins and components which are developed by thousands of contributors.
Thanks to them, a lot of changes happen in the project every day. We are cordially grateful to everybody who participates in the project, regardless of contribution size. Everything matters: new features, bug fixes, documentation, blog posts, well reported issues, Stackoverflow responses, etc. THANKS A LOT TO ALL CONTRIBUTORS!

So, keep updating Jenkins and exploring new features.
And stay tuned, there is much more to come next year!

=== What’s next?

*Technical changes.* 2021 will be another busy year for the Jenkins community.
There are many long-overdue changes in the project, which need to happen if we want Jenkins to succeed.

> There are many areas on the https://www.jenkins.io/project/roadmap/[roadmap]: UX revamp, cloud native Jenkins, pluggable storage, etc.
> There will also be a continued cleanup of old dependencies and technical debt.
> Several key changes are expected to land in the March LTS baseline: update to Spring Security, XStream unforking, JQuery update, etc.(https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/11/10/major-changes-in-weekly-releases/[announcement]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many areas on the link:/project/roadmap/[roadmap]: UX revamp, cloud native Jenkins, pluggable storage, etc.
There will also be a continued cleanup of old dependencies and technical debt.
Several key changes are expected to land in the March LTS baseline: update to Spring Security, XStream unforking, JQuery update, etc.(link:/blog/2020/11/10/major-changes-in-weekly-releases/[announcement]).
```

Wide adoption of documentation-as-code will also continue for plugins By this time almost 600 plugins have been migrated, but there are hundreds more plugins to go. 

*Security.* Another important area is Jenkins security. Automation tools like Jenkins are a key part of the software delivery process in organizations, and their security is essential for the security of products. 
Misconfigured or outdated systems are a common attack vector, but there are also areas for improvement on the project’s side.
Be sure there will be security advisories and vulnerability fixes in 2021.
We plan to keep adopting best security development and software delivery practices, and to improve dependency management and developer tools in the project. These areas will be in the spotlight for the project next year.

*Events.* Next month we will participate in https://fosdem.org/[FOSDEM], and there will be a virtual Jenkins stand there.
There will also be a CI/CD devroom.
If you are interested to meet Jenkins contributors, it is a great opportunity. We also plan to continue all outreach programs and on onboarding more contributors.

> At the moment we are looking for Google Summer of Code 2020 mentors and project ideas (https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/12/16/call-for-mentors/[announcement]).
> We are also ready to consider other non-coding project ideas as a part of CommunityBridge If you are interested, please contact the https://www.jenkins.io/sigs/advocacy-and-outreach/[Advocacy and Outreach SIG].

Reviewer: Punctuation and shorten link
```suggestion
At the moment we are looking for Google Summer of Code 2020 mentors and project ideas (link:/blog/2020/12/16/call-for-mentors/[announcement]).
We are also ready to consider other non-coding project ideas as a part of CommunityBridge.
If you are interested, please contact the link:/sigs/advocacy-and-outreach/[Advocacy and Outreach SIG].
```

=== Join us in 2021!

We are always looking for more contributors, regardless of the profile and experience.
Jenkins is a vast ecosystem which includes many modern technologies. 

We invite Jenkins users and contributors to participate in the community and to move these initiatives forward! 

> Join us in the https://www.jenkins.io/mailing-lists/[mailing lists] and https://www.jenkins.io/sigs/[special interest groups],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Join us in the link:/mailing-lists/[mailing lists] and link:/sigs/[special interest groups],
```
